and they all say the same thing
including my mother who at 92 had
outlived all 50 of her lifelong friends
every one of her friends was dead she
was alone and she said alan you need to
warn your patients if they're going to
do this diet
make younger friends
hey everybody welcome to another episode
of health theory i'm here today with dr
alan goldhamer who is the founder of
true north health center
a leader in the field of plant-based
nutrition i'm super excited to talk to
you because i come from um i won't say
an entirely meat-based approach but i am
no stranger to meet um so first of all
welcome to the show
thanks for having me absolutely i was
very intrigued by
um something that i've heard you talk
about and this was really the thing that
sucked me into your world which is that
if you go to a doctor today they don't
actually expect you to get better
and
that gave me the chills just saying it
now and when i heard it the first time i
was like oh my god that is so true
that's not the paradigm um
why is that not the paradigm
well you know in medicine particularly
for
conditions like high blood pressure
diabetes autoimmune diseases certain
forms of cancer like lymphoma that make
up you know a significant percentage of
the problems that people have
medical management is just that it's
management they'll say take these drugs
and you'll be on these drugs the rest of
your life because they'll guarantee you
that you'll never get well
so
the reason for that is that the drugs
have nothing to do with the reason why
you got sick
and they're strictly trying to manage
the consequences of your illness and
today for example conditions like high
blood pressure you're not even being
treated for your condition you're being
treated for your diet
you're being treated for the diet that
causes hypertension the diet that causes
uh 40 of people over 25 and 63 percent
of people over 60 to have high blood
pressure
to have the leading contributing cause
of death and disability the major
justification for prescription
medications it's a huge multi-billion
dollar business
and what's uh really ironic about it is
that it's completely
treatable in the vast majority of cases
through diet and lifestyle intervention
you know we did a study uh medically
supervised water only fasting in the
treatment hypertension 174 consecutive
patients 174 people achieve low enough
pressure to eliminate the need for
medication we have the largest effect
size ever shown in treating high blood
pressure in humans with an average
effect size of 60 points in stage 3
hypertension not taking into account the
fact that most of these people are
medicated when they start none of them
are medicated when we're done
and it's sustainable to the degree that
they're willing to adopt a whole plant
food sos free diet
okay so sos is that international symbol
of danger
or it also stands for salt oil and sugar
the chemicals added to food that make
people fat sick and miserable and give
them conditions like high blood pressure
given my proclivity for
meat from how it makes me feel and a
health standpoint i would say
the fact that your diet is so hardcore i
never would have thought you'd be the
one to draw me in
um with your stance on this so i want to
i want to take things sort of one piece
at a time so first i want to talk about
true north the things that you see in
the clinic are what really
pulled me in so one tell people when you
founded it i was startled by how long
you've had this going on and talk to me
just about the the number of people
you've put through your clinic
right well so my wife dr moreno and i
started true north health in 1984 so
we've been doing
medically supervised water only fasting
for 36 years we've had over 20 000
patients undergo fasting
uh so one thing that i find crazy just
to give people some context is when you
started you had to retain a defense
attorney
because of how fasting was perceived
walk us through that because we're in a
weird moment now where i think fasting
is sort of catching on but people don't
understand just how far we've come
well yeah i mean when i was starting
fasting the california board of medical
quality assurance at that time
determined that recommending fasting to
a patient
constituted such a gross violation of
the standard of medical practice that it
rose to the level of criminal negligence
so now in fairness
now we've gone from being criminal
quacks
to cutting-edge researchers because you
know fasting's gained some notoriety and
our 501 c 3 true north health
foundation is doing original research
with
fasting and looking at some of these
exotic biomarkers there's other people
like walter longo who's been publishing
some really fabulous work in major
impact journals talking about
intermittent fasting and and fasting
mimicking approaches
and uh
so you know now this has kind of come
full circle and so the idea that people
are sick from dietary excess and that
reversing the consequences of dietary
excess may be a key to stimulating
everything from autophagy to uh you know
reducing acute phase reactive proteins
associated with inflammation to
increasing brain derived neurotrophic
factor in the brain to prevent
alzheimer's disease all of these
mechanisms that fasting induces
interestingly enough many of them are
the same biomarkers that change with
exercise
exercise and fasting both
tend to impact these health promotion
disease reversal uh biomarkers and it
may be because both fasting and exercise
reverse the consequences of dietary
excess it is dietary excess particularly
refined foods
whether it's refined carbohydrates the
sugars the oils the salt or refined meat
foods
you know animal foods that have been
highly refined either one of those these
high animal protein high refined
carbohydrate diets these are the things
that cause people to be fat sick and
miserable this is why we have this
epidemic of chronic degenerative disease
because of what we're putting in our
mouth
you know it's interesting just like you
know meat would be considered a whole
food
processed meat products and processed
animal food products dairy products etc
are have completely different effects on
the body same thing with you know
complex carbohydrates whole plant foods
have a certain effect but you refine
them into sugars and flowers now you get
a completely different response i want
to get into the specifics of the diet
and stuff but first i want to revolve
around fasting a little bit more so do
you have
a sense of
okay we've got this thing it's
incredibly good for you we've got this
thing that's a part of religious
tradition going back god knows how long
like it seems like if i'm not mistaken
virtually every major religion has some
sort of fasting application to it so
there's obviously a spiritual
understanding of it and yet becomes the
thing that once we're talking medically
becomes so
grossly misunderstood maligned attacked
is it just that the feeling of being
hungry triggers this like sense of
urgency of like yo i've got to eat that
causes people to have what i'll call a
sort of deranged response to it
is there something else
why people are people are very afraid
that uh not eating they're not sure
exactly how much period of time would
result in their demise and it feels that
way because you know you're programmed
to make sure that you overcome
deprivation in a world of our ancient
ancestors it was scarcity that was the
dominant rule
most humans didn't live long enough to
reproduce and that was because of
deprivation and scarcity people didn't
get enough to eat or couldn't avoid
being eaten so your basic instincts are
eat as much as you can whenever you can
of the most concentrated foods available
and if you're lucky maybe you'll live
long enough to reproduce
and so that's your instincts now we live
in a very a natural environment of of
abundance of excess it just doesn't ever
really happen in nature except when uh
human you know food stuffs become
available animals don't suffer obesity
even
animals you think of as being fat like
whales are really nine percent body fat
so they're lean mean machines
and again you know survival is get
enough to eat and don't get eaten that's
that's true for all animals we because
of our innovative capacities created a
situation we invented agriculture and we
figured out how to get food and then we
figured out how to refine it and
concentrate it and then we figured out
how to do animal husbandry so we could
raise lots of very rich uh
food processing machines essentially in
the form of animals and so now we're in
a situation where we can get enough to
eat not even get off the couch we don't
have to exercise we pay other people to
do it we call it the nfl we sit in a
couch drink high caloric beer and engage
in mock warfare pretending we're part of
the winning coalition
i love the way you describe stuff is is
pretty amazing and i think over the
course of the interview people are going
to realize you are not afraid to
contradict people or
to say what you think is right or to
carry a little fan in your pocket so if
somebody starts smoking near you that
you can actually blow the smoke back in
their face there are so many things
about your personality that make you
perfectly suited to um focus on what
works and so one i want to know
why are people seeing the profound
effects of that
and then two
why you you're so careful to always say
medically supervised
why does that matter well what we really
recommend there's two types of fasting
there's there's short-term intermittent
fasting which we recommend people do
every day that everybody fast every day
for between 12 and 16 hours depending on
what your target is and that means that
you don't eat at least three hours
before you go to sleep hopefully going
to sleep at a reasonable hour
and so that gives you 12 to 16 hours of
fasting and eight hour feeding window we
recommend that that in that eight hour
feeding window that the you know whole
natural food diet that you eat excludes
all the chemicals and the processed
foods and the other stuff and in doing
that you get the quantity and quality of
nutrients you need and you give yourself
a 16 hour period of fasting every day
and cumulatively that's thought to
induce
changes and and stimulate factors that
are that promote healing it also helps
minimize overeating and so you know the
net effect of that intermittent fasting
which virtually everybody can do safely
on their own is something we recommend
and then periodically we recommend
people take a longer period of time to
do water only fasting in our clinic we
fast people from five to forty days
and so typically faster two three four
weeks of time that needs to be done in a
minute is that only for people that are
obese
no no not at all in fact most of our
patients uh it's high blood pressure
diabetes autoimmune diseases lymphoma
and we have also healthy people that are
just coming in for a shorter period of
time like a week the reason we talk
about supervision in that regard is
number one not everybody's a good
candidate for fasting some people should
not be fasting give me something
well if people have for example cranium
levels over 2.0 kidney function is
inadequate putting them on a fast can
shut their kidneys down result in kidney
failure and death um if they have
cardiovascular why i've never heard that
but why would your kidney shot because
when you go on a fast you
massively mobilize a detoxification
response and the kidneys can only
process so much material and if you
overload the kidneys you end up with a
kidney failure situation and that's you
know you've heard recently there's been
people that have tried dry fasting and
dry fasting particularly puts a heavy
load on the kidney and there was a death
associated with one of its proponents
just because you know you have to have a
solute in order for the kidneys to
function you have to have a way of
getting the material that's mobilized
out of the system why is fasting
triggered detoxification
well if you think about it when you're
going on a fast there's nothing for the
body to do except mobilize its reserves
and in water fasting particularly in a
resting state those reserves are
predominantly fat
in fact we've done a study recently at
the true north health center where we've
used a dexa scanner with software that
allows us to do whole body composition
we've determined not only is mostly fat
mobilized during water only fasting but
specifically in preferentially visceral
fat
so a person might lose say for example
20 of their adipose tissue but they'll
lose 50 60 percent of their of their
visceral fat which is really exciting
much faster than for example being on a
a low carbohydrate diet in terms of the
ratio of visceral fat mobilization to uh
subcutaneous fat
and in that fat contains a lot of fat
soluble materials and it's where a lot
of toxins are stored when those fats are
mobilized you get a increasing load pcbs
dioxin pesticide residues etc all these
fat soluble nutrients are rapidly
mobilized processed and eliminated but
you need to have the capacity to
actually eliminate materials and most of
those matures are eliminated
in the urine that's the blood being
processed by the kidneys and if you do a
fat biopsy on any person you'll find
hundreds of different chemicals in
various concentrations and if you track
back how did those chemicals get in the
body where did they come from obviously
if people take drugs or they smoke and
they drink alcohol and they
eat foods from the environment that are
polluted that's a potential source but
about 90 according to some researchers
got there from one behavior and that's
eating animal foods
animals biologically concentrate the
toxins from their environment so a
calorie of animal food could have two to
a thousand times the concentration of a
given chemical compared to say a
plant-based food calorie and so the
consumption of large amounts of animal
food potentially expose people to
proportionally higher ratios of these
materials and it's also why people on
very high animal food diets often have a
much more difficult time adapting to the
fasting state initially because there's
just literally more to process and
eliminating but it does and so that's
particular i might mention true of
refined animal products just like
refined plant products have particular
problems so i think we need to be clear
that it's actually these highly
processed foods of any kind that seem to
be the biggest sources of concentration
of chemicals it's not necessarily the
brown rice that's the main problem it
might be the rice syrup or it's the
products that the highly concentrated
products that result in the largest
concentrations of
materials undesirable materials
when you fast though the body rapidly
mobilizes these materials if you fast
and exercise them
once you've depleted your glycogen
stores after say 24-48 hours the only
way the body would get the needed
glucose to maintain muscle activity or
excess brain activity would be through
gluconeogenesis you'd have to break down
proteins in order to get that so what
happens is if you fast and exercise you
actually lose more weight but more of
it's lean tissue
if you fast and rest you you mobilize
predominantly fat and specifically and
preferentially visceral fat so in
addition to making sure a person is a
good candidate for fasting with a
history exam and lab we also need to
make sure they rest during fasting now
there's modified fasting when you take a
certain amount of calories therefore you
have more glucose available you're able
to you know minimize gluconeogenesis
that's a different process
water only fasting though needs to be
done resting if you're going to maximize
detox preserve lean tissue
and maximize fat loss and that we've
been able to prove now you know we've
actually done this and we've done you
know before during after fasting six
week follow-ups we've got the data and
so we can put a lot of the old wives
tales to rest that paper will be
published um
later this year and and i think that'll
really make people aware of just why
this rest which is so contraindited to
people trying to maximize weight loss is
important with fasting and you know if
the goal is to really detoxify the best
way to do it is prep properly
before fasting really important people
that try to say quit coffee at the same
time they're going on a fast really
undermine themselves because the
caffeine withdrawal is actually quite
difficult fasting isn't so difficult if
you prep well all of a sudden fasting
doesn't even look that hard people go to
cooking classes they're interactive they
go down to the dining room they interact
with people even on these long fast two
three four five weeks and they're they
do fine but they are resting and so
resting in some ways is a little bit
harder but it's more effective i say
it's harder because you'll detox more
you'll feel worse but we don't care how
you feel we care how well you get
so if you feel bad in fasting doesn't
bother me as long as you get well you'll
totally forgive us and so next time you
fast you want to make sure you rest
during that doesn't mean you can't do
some stretching you can't do meditation
there's things you can do but they're
more passive and then you look at how
your recovery is post-fasting you'll
find it's really quite fabulous because
not only you get rid of the inflammation
and the joint pain and some of the
chronic injuries but then you recover
quickly and we and we're able to
demonstrate that quantitatively now as
as lean tissue recovers fat continues to
go down after fasting so you're losing
fat you're losing fat you continue to
lose fat even though you're regaining
quote weight because glycogen water
fiber and muscle come back after fasting
fat does not what's interesting is you
have two pounds of glycogen so you know
you're going to get that two pound back
you've got fiber that has to go back in
the gut unless you're eating an all meat
diet then there is no fiber
and there's also
hydration there's a physiological
dehydration with fasting now that's
more
when you're exercising you dehydrate
more so it looks like you're losing more
weight but all you're doing is
dehydrating why are you dehydrating if
you're drinking water
it doesn't matter if you're drinking
water if it's you hold it in the cells
there's a physiological adaptation to
fasting where there's a natural
dehydration state it's probably part of
the conservation mechanism there's a lot
of weird things that happen very
contraintuitive during fasting like for
example you know we talked about
exercise increasing brain derived
neurotrophic factor that preserves the
brain and protects the nervous system it
also increases in fasting you think
about exercise you're vigorously active
fasting you're laying on your around and
not doing much they both are changing
these same things in the same way it's
it's really really
um
non-intuitive but when we look at the
science if we look at the data and then
we look at the clinical outcomes it's
really apparent and now we're tracking
people 30 35 years i've got people now
that are in their 80s that we started
off in their 50s and they all say the
same thing including my mother who at 92
had outlived all 50 of her lifelong
friends every one of her friends was
dead she was alone and she said alan you
need to warn your patients if they're
going to do this diet
make younger friends
so i'm telling people starting right now
make younger friends so when you're
older and you're still around you know
they'll you'll have people to interact
with
that i mean you know still heartbreaking
but good problem to have
so talk to me about the longer duration
fast so i know that the longest fast is
like 280 days or i mean just something
absolutely absurd so i knew that it was
physiologically possible but i imagined
it was more proportional to the amount
of body fat that you have but like
somebody with a normal bmi
um maybe will peg them at something like
15 body fat how long can they fast water
so an 155 pound 70 kilogram male
okay
could go 70 days well the problem is
once you get through fasting you enter a
process called starvation and now once
you enter starvation there's a
relatively short period of time and then
you die we don't do that because it
would really be bad for our outcome data
so we're very careful to avoid that
we've had 20 000 walk in 20 000 people
walk out we are experts at not letting
people enter into starvation the other
thing with fasting while we're talking
about risks is the re-feeding period if
you have a long period of fasting and
you re-feed it inappropriately you can
get a condition called re-feeding
syndrome which can be fatal it's a very
serious problem where electrolyte
balances and all kinds of stuff can
occur we've never seen that because we
have a very specific refeeding protocol
that's followed and we refeed for a
period of no less than half the length
of the fast in a controlled setting so
it is it is important you can also get a
condition called post-fasting edema when
you get off all the greasy salty
processed crap that people are living on
and you do a fast all that gets flushed
out of the body if you then expose a
person to very high concentrations of
sodium like in commercial soups or
something like that the body will suck
that material and flew it up to protect
itself from it and that can result in
post-fasting edema if you do it slowly
you can get back to whatever your normal
diet was without that problem but it has
to happen over a period of time so
there's a re-feeding period that's
important particularly in this long-term
fasting you know in the three-day the
five-day fast for most people that's not
going to result in you know as much of
it of an issue they may get a belly ache
if they eat eat too much food but
they're not going to get the very
serious consequences as you can see in
very long-term fasting now the other
concern here is of course medications
some medications you don't want to
rapidly discontinue
anticoagulant medications steroid
medications any psychotic medications
the rapid withdrawal of those
medications can induce a very serious uh
or life-threatening response
some medications
you want to get off as soon as possible
but you don't want to be taking those
medications during fasting so
medications that might not do that much
damage feeding can be very serious
fasting even non-sterile
anti-inflammatories and common
over-the-counter medications in the
fasting state strongly contraindicated
result in all kinds of downstream
consequences
supplementation
is included lots of complications in the
fasting state whereas you wouldn't
necessarily see any problem in the
feeding state that's one of the reasons
we talk about making sure before a
person undertakes a long-term fast they
have appropriate history exam and lab
remember 99 of patients have no
complications uh with fasting but one
percent can have very serious
complications important that percentage
be identified monitored and so you don't
end up with bad outcomes because that's
what gives fasting a bad name is people
doing it inappropriately they continue
to work they get dehydrated which is one
of the main issues with fasting is
maintaining adequate hydration and
drinking water itself won't assure that
in fact drinking too much water can
flush your electrolytes out and result
in um
water intoxication so if we don't solve
the problem drinking water how do we
solve the problem
right we solve it by resting maintaining
appropriate hydration and allow the
natural recycling mechanisms in the body
to maintain nutritional status and
monitoring people so that we don't get
into a depleted state that's why we're
monitoring electrolytes that's why we do
twice daily examinations on patients so
it is a safe and natural adaptation
remember fasting is a biological
adaptation you notice everybody every
human can fast we have to be able to
fast every human that couldn't fast died
because every time spring came late
there's no way to sustain this bulbous
neuronal net our massively oversized
brain two and a half times the vas of
say a chimp chimps don't fast you don't
feed a chip in a week or so they're dead
they that's why you'll never see chimps
wandering away from the tropics they
live with a constant year-round supply
of food because their brain doesn't
change to burning
ketones your brain is a bi-fuel brain it
changes completely the normal
fuel is glucose and that's your main
burner of glucose is your brain
that's the biggest thing and when the
brain goes in the fasting state it
changes to burning ketone bodies
particularly beta-hydroxybutyric acid
and it becomes preferentially burning it
just brings a tiny little bit of glucose
and that's the little bit of
gluconeogenesis that continues during
fasting unless you're active
then of course your muscles burn glucose
and now you really start breaking muscle
down
so
the brain being a bi-fuel brain had to
be that way because otherwise humans
when spring came late because we burned
so much glucose in our brain we wouldn't
have been able to make it and this is
the mechanism by which
fasting mimicking diets and keto diets
play
because if you go on a very high fat
diet or a high fat high protein diet
which some people do and you don't eat
carbohydrates this fasting mechanism
kicks in so your brain changes over to
burning ketones you go into ketosis and
it has a hunger blunting effect
when you're in a ketotic state you don't
feel hunger and as a consequence that
helps people that are trying to do
short-term weight loss the problem is
what's good for short-term weight loss
isn't necessarily the same thing that's
best for long-term health stability so
in our clinic we're not a weight loss
clinic we're not looking to maximize
gross weight on the scale over a short
period of time we're interested in fat
loss and improving health so we're
looking at what does it take not only to
live a long life everybody wants to live
their full potential but more
importantly how do you avoid debility
how do you avoid spending the last 79.6
years in debility 16 years in poor
health what the average person is doing
how do you avoid finding yourself unable
to talk or move lying in some nursing
home bed waiting for people to change
your diaper for the last years or
decades of your life how do you increase
healthy life expectancy not just life
expectancy the years you live fully
functional how do you ensure a good
death that means you live your life to
your full potential one day you go to
sleep you don't wake up because you
reached your genetic potential and not
become debilitated uh individual for
years and decades where we spend most of
our money and effectively trying to
manage illnesses that were caused by
poor diet lifestyle choices
that's what we're using fasting to do is
try to help healthy life expectancy and
then a whole plant food sos free diet to
sustain it yeah so i think now now's the
time to get into that so the whole idea
of no salt no sugar no oil
this was the thing that really pulled me
in so we used to joke
my last company was a nutrition company
and we used to joke if it tastes good
spit it out
and it was just like
it's so many things that
taste good are just absolutely terrible
for you and but you know that's because
people are addicted to the artificial
stimulation of these chemicals we've
done a study a taste adaptation study
we've shown with fasting your actual
ability to detect salt and sugar your
hedonic response to food actually
changes and you can taste vegetables
that are naturally high in sodium but
most people don't you know they don't
notice it after fasting oh my gosh you
think wow this is really amazing and so
good food starts to taste good again and
sometimes the stuff you used to like is
too spicy too salty because your actual
polish no it can adapt back go back to
eating that jerky and stuff eventually
you'll get back to you know craving the
salt but the point is
it's not as hard as people think it's
going to be long-term because you get to
the point you actually would prefer you
know the the beans and grains and nuts
and seeds and these kind of things it's
not just discipline you know that dries
it except initially and that's where
fasting can be helpful it makes that
transition quicker you asked about how
long do people have to fast well
sometimes it only takes a few days of
fasting to induce these real in healthy
people to induce these changes that's
why people that maybe do a yearly fast
of three to five days or seven days find
it can be very helpful not just the
detoxifying for the three days five days
but the effect that it has and how they
feel they can overcome their
hypertension their diabetes their
autoimmune diseases you know glucose and
insulin everybody's interested in
glucose and particularly insulin it's
profoundly affected by fasting fasting
is one of the few things you can do to
actually reverse insulin resistance you
know what another thing that helps with
insulin resistances
exercise that's why diabetics you got to
get them eating right now is the smile
because you're seeing another place
where those two things line up
it constantly repeats itself in fact one
of the things we did to save time was
identify the markers that improve with
exercise and then testament fasting it's
like it just saves a whole bunch of time
because you know like for example igf-1
insulin growth factor one the lower the
igf-1 the longer the animals live
periodic fasting in rats for example you
can double their lifespan just by doing
periodic fasting right in what duration
like just 16.
well and remember rats are completely
different than people so with rats you
can only fast about four days as their
potential not like humans which goes 70
days or more
rats are very short so it's
proportionately different time you don't
compare days to days but the process of
doing say for example every other day
eating at living them will add you know
significantly to the lifespan of the rat
why well they measured biomarkers and
they found out that insulin growth
factor
goes down and that's associated with
both fasting and
exercise another one
leptin which is
the lower the leptin levels is
associated with reduced inflammation and
now the general theories are that
inflammation largely responsible for all
kinds of things not just the joint pain
but also your heart disease and cancer
possibly and kidney issues and so lower
leptin levels seem to be good leptin
levels go down with fasting blood
pressure and heart rate i already told
you largest effect size ever shown
treating hypertension in with with
fasting we have very dramatic and
consistent results with that we're doing
a study right now with the mayo clinic
looking at phase one clinical trial the
treatment of high blood pressure using
fasting instead of medication
the microbial load you have what five
pounds of bacteria living in your
intestinal tract a thousand strains of
different bacteria living creatures
eating and pooing inside you right now
and what those bacteria poo in you
depends on what you feed them
and so if you feed um your bacteria
soluble fibers which is their from our
viewpoint natural food you get vitamin k
and fertilizer
but if you feed them animal-based foods
you get completely different by-products
that are associated with increased
inflammation so that's why we want to be
careful about how much quantity
particularly animal protein
the inflammation markers like if you
look at il-6 and tn alpha and all these
different markers they've identified
that associate with inflammation they go
down with exercise and fasting people
that exercise regularly people that fast
periodically have lower levels of these
inflammatory markers but fasting doesn't
just reduce things it also increases
things so there's all kinds of markers
now that have been identified going up
with fasting um things that improve and
reduce inflammation ghrelin and ato
yeah uh it's it's one of these markers
that's associated with insulin
sensitivity and inflammation
ampk down regulates something else
called pgc1 alpha which is associated
with increasing mitochondrial biogenesis
so the actual energy producing guys that
live in your cells
go up with
fast
now if we were going to build out the
ultimate fasting protocol and in fact
what do you do annually i know you're
doing the the narrowed eating window so
maybe a 16-8 or something like that but
when do you do a multi-day fast
yeah so i i um
i hate fasting
it's awful because you can't exercise
you can't you know play basketball you
can't you have to rest it's really awful
but
it's also very helpful so i do it every
year i fast for a week our basic
protocol is in healthy people you know
that are on healthy diets uh generally
have almost no downward symptoms during
fasting they don't have hunger they
don't have terrible healing crises they
don't get a lot of it's pretty boring
frankly so we meditate we relax and we
rest and try to do all the right things
and i do it for a week and if at the end
of a week perfectly stable no symptoms
that's it back to refeeding carefully
takes half the length of the faster we
feed back to the whole plant food sos
free diet and we do that every year and
i i just did mine in in november very
uneventful very helpful on many levels
but not exciting patients much more
entertaining because they're coming off
animal products they're coming off
coffee they're coming off alcohol
they're coming off medications they'll
have active healing crisis inflammation
mucus discharge they'll have skin
elimination you'll see the lumps and
bumps falling off you'll see low back
discomfort you'll see headaches you'll
see sleep disruption it can be very what
i call entertaining
uh and that you just keep going until
that resolves are they getting those
symptoms though because of the release
of toxins like why on earth would your
lower back hurt
oh because the kidneys are processing
most of these metabolic products and you
get what's called visceral somatic
referral pain for three to five days and
then it goes away
the other thing that happens is
things
mobilize in inverse proportion so in
other words you can lose fifty percent
of your visceral fat but you only lose
twenty percent of your adipose tissue
and only four percent of lean tissue and
then the lean tissue comes back with
re-feeding but the fat doesn't the fat
continues to drop if you're doing the
sos diet right so if you're
educate people about how to eat we do
cooking demos we do lectures we have a
whole roku channel we've got you know we
do all kinds of stuff to what i call
brainwash people so that they're
prepared to go home and efficiently
apply a whole natural foods diet
get lots of we particularly like
vegetable materials so both raw and
cooked vegetable materials and these
starches like cupboard squash and
butternut squash and kombucha we're not
talking about uh
you know tater tots and flour products
and sugary things and all kinds of
artificial processed crap type of whole
foods okay so your fruits vegetables um
non-glutenous grains we don't use
glutinous grains at all we don't we're
using more like when we talk about
grains we're talking about quinoa and
millet and rice and you know like you'd
kind of let's let's dip into a few
things specifically that as somebody
who's
dabbled in sort of a plant first
approach but never gone vegetarian or
vegan um one i've always told people
that fruit is nature's candy bar
what what is it about like can i take an
unlimited amount of fruit cause like if
you told me i could eat watermelon
apples bananas oranges all day i'm in
homie like i don't need anything else
that's not gonna work so the problem is
today's hybridized fruits are very high
in sugar and very low in fiber so
they're not like the wild apples in
hawaii where they look more like
vegetables i mean these are and they're
perfectly good foods if they're used
appropriately so we use whole fruit not
fruit juices
not dried fruits not processed you know
artificial sugars we're talking about
your berries your melons and we usually
have one meal that might have some fruit
and two meals that are really more
vegetable dominated so they might let's
say for example somebody has oatmeal in
the morning with some blueberries and
maybe some flax seeds ground or some
walnuts they have a huge salad with big
steamed vegetables at lunch and dinner
with enough complex carbohydrates so
they don't get too skinny and so the
idea is we're looking about 10 percent
of calories from protein about 15 to 18
percent of calories from fat with the
balance coming from whole plant food
carbohydrate now there's a problem in
order to get enough calories on this
kind of a diet you have to eat a lot of
volume you're talking about several
pounds of food a day because you know
potatoes rice and beans all have 500
calories a pound not you know 2 000
calories a pound from say nuts or seeds
or even higher from animal products so
you have to eat or 4 000 calories a
pound from oil
so you we're not pouring olive oil over
everything we're just eating whole foods
there's no salt oil or sugar
it's just the salt oil and sugar
naturally containing in these whole
foods why is salt bad
well salt has a couple problems salts
not bad sodium chloride is an
unnecessary nutrient without which you
die you have to have enough sodium in
your diet it happens to be that you get
all the sodium you need from the large
volumes of these whole natural foods
just like you get enough carbohydrate
you don't have to add sugar and then you
get enough essential fatty acids
including decosaxonic acid etc that you
form from your dha are you formed from
your omega-3 by eating whole plant foods
but the problem with added salt is that
it stimulates what's called passive
overeating so if you just give an animal
it's filled till it feels satiated say
rice whatever it'll eat a certain amount
then it feels satiated you salt it
they'll eat significantly more people
say yeah it tastes better you're eating
more because you like it better but
you're eating more because the salt the
chemical salt the sodium chloride in
higher concentration stimulates dopamine
in the brain results in increased intake
it affects satiety
and so
the problem for people trying to lose
weight if they're eating salted foods
usually too the salted foods are things
like flour products that are turned into
breads or crackers or cookies that are
also hyper concentrated in calories but
the salt will allow them to eat more
think about bread if you take the salt
out of bread it's and and you take out
the sugar it's called matzah well you
know it's they have to eat it once a
year and on passover and that's it
because that's the only time you'll talk
nobody's running out buying big boxes of
lots as a routine because it's flour and
water it doesn't taste good because any
highly fractionated food needs salt oil
and sugar or combinations in order to
increase flavor that's what chefs are is
people that take hyper-concentrated
foods and add salt oil and sugar to it
and deliver it to the palate so it
stimulates the brain in the most intense
way possible we're saying get away from
all that let's um your addict analogy i
think is very apt and i want people to
burn that into their soul that there are
some people that can get away with
having some of this stuff and it doesn't
become a huge problem though they would
almost certainly be better off from a
longevity perspective from a feel-good
perspective if they went to a totally
plant-based sos diet um but so for
someone like me i don't struggle with my
weight i don't have an addictive
personality i can fast if i want just
because i think it's better for me
but i
when i think about going to a full
plant-based diet sort of
forgetting about a pure sos diet for a
second but one of the things that i
already eat that i know that i would eat
is
an avocado like literally the avocado
mash it
um nothing else added to it i take a raw
baby carrot and then i put salt on the
avocado it is delicious is it
still bad for me though if i am
i'm not overweight i don't have a
problem overeating it
at that point does salt still have such
a problem that i should be cutting it
out on my diet or am i only cutting it
out to stop me from passive overeating
well i think it's not just passive
overeating because salt also is a very
powerful preservative which is why it's
used you know throughout history
before we had refrigeration and stuff
that helped food not go bad so the
people to get sick from eating spoiled
meats and other foods and so it is an
effective preservative but when you
think about the five pounds of bacteria
that live in your gut it may not be too
good an idea to put too much of a
preservative into that gut because it
will alter the microflora part of the
reason people on meat-based diets have
completely different microflora than
plant-based diets may in part be because
of the higher salt intake that's
oftentimes associated with it now let's
be clear you know vegan diets can be
total crap
soda pop
potato chips and other generic terms for
highly processed fractionated foods can
all be vegan
you know oreo cookies are vegan that
doesn't make them healthy it just makes
them not have animal food in it so i'm
not arguing uh that that vegan foods
can't be crappy foods they certainly can
i get in trouble speaking at national
vegan conferences explaining to people
that as as challenging as meat products
can be the vegan processed food products
may be worse and that they'd be better
off eating the meat and that just gets
them all upset because they're being
driven from you know moral ethical and
spiritual viewpoints and saving the
planet and all that stuff i'm not
arguing that i'm just arguing i just
want patients to live a long and healthy
life and not be debilitated and we know
that too much animal protein
is definitely a detriment so people that
are eating large amounts of animal
protein have higher problems with kidney
disease and cardiovascular disease
there's definitely
at some point there's too much that
needs to be reduced even for people
they're going to advocate animal foods
as a whole natural food now you might
ask me can people eat meat and still
maintain optimum weight absolutely
because meat isn't a highly fractionated
pleasure trap food it's a whole natural
the problem with meat is it's very
concentrated if you eat too much of it
you can have problems but it's not the
same thing for example as dairy products
which are a highly processed animal food
that has all the challenges of animal
foods but now it has the problems of the
salt like try eating your cheese without
salt see what it tastes like it's the
salt that people really like about it
absolutely so that's why this gets very
clouded and confusing is that because
it's not just
meat or it's not just
plants it's it's really a question of
how processed foods are and how do we
get away from having so much processed
foods and frankly meat itself without
salt
you know just boil some meat and chew on
it a bit and see if that's how appealing
it is to you know what i'm saying it's
like yeah now i think people get sugar
and i think a lot of people so associate
salt with heart disease or high blood
pressure that they're they can buy those
two the one that trips me out and then
i'm super interested to get your take on
is not bad oils things that everybody
considers bad like um you know uh
vegetable oil you know french fries
fried oil like that kind of thing but
like olive oil on a salad like
that's the one i want to talk about so
olive oil is way less bad than the other
ones it's omega-9 fatty acid has a
different ratio of fatty acids it can be
less processed you know theoretically
you can squish those olives and extract
the oil
the thing is it's still nine calories a
gram of highly
processed fat that begins to peroxidize
as you break it down so there's still
challenges even with olive oil now would
you would i agree that olive oil is less
bad than the others oh no question and
particularly if it's not heated at high
temperature which is the other problem
with fats when you do fried foods and i
mean that's a whole nother cascade of
problems i don't think most people are
arguing that that's good though most
people know that's not but they're going
to want to try to preserve well like
mcdougall says john mcdougall says that
people love good news about their bad
habits and so the arguments are that
this is so much less bad that now it
makes it good well that's not really
true less bad just means less bad it
doesn't make it good you don't need to
fractionate or process your oils down
you can get all the essential fats you
need by using your avocado
or and minimally processing it okay you
mush it or you chew it up but you don't
have to extract the oil out of the cells
and increase its concentration remove
the fiber remove a lot of the other
benefits
the problem with um
too much fat in the diet though is that
fat is very efficient uh and so as a
consequence it's really easy
particularly eating refined oils to
overeat you know that one tablespoon of
olive oil has more calories than the
salad
so we we aren't really i just drink a
little put a little drip but it's so
rich we just aren't getting the
proportion here
that pound of salad has 100 100 calories
whereas you know you've got 100 you know
uh more than 100 calories in that in
that dressing serving so
it's it's more than you think and if you
really literally just put a few drops on
which you find is you can't taste it
there's no reason for it to even be
there so if i would say have your your
avocado and your carrots just leave
leave the salt alone you don't need the
extra
added salt that and you know
then you'll be back to a whole natural
food diet that's sos free
talk to me about variety because
honestly i could eat
avocados carrots
kale
um a really small handful of things a
banana maybe an apple you know a couple
times a week whatever i get that we
can't overdo the you know now sort of
bastardized fruit
but how much variety do i need to not be
malnutritioned on a vegetarian diet what
surprisingly small amount and
particularly if it rotates with the
season for example if you ate just 2 000
calories we'll just assume for a second
that you were the average you need more
than that but if you were the average
guy weren't working out didn't use your
brain that much and you only needed 2
000 calories a day just which is the rda
average um my guess is you probably burn
3 000 calories a day or more but at 2
000 calories a day if you ate
two thousand cards of just say brown
rice and broccoli that was it
your entire diet
you would get all the vitamins minerals
uh protein essential amino acids you get
about 80 grams of protein out of that
and
you know
three cups of rice uh
four cups of broccoli it would be a
boring diet but you would get everything
except b12 that you need you know and
that is one thing on these plant-based
diets if you really aren't getting the
fecal contamination associated with
animal foods you do need to get a source
of b12 it only comes from bacteria and
we use recommend a thousand micrograms
of methylcobalamin a day and that'll
meet virtually everybody's needs so that
is an issue you have to get out in the
sun to get enough vitamin d because
you're not drinking your vitamin d
fortified milk because you have to
actually make it in the sun or
supplement it if necessary so
fortunately
you can avoid most of the other pills
and potions and powders because these
large volumes of plant-based foods have
high degree of nutrition and
particularly when you emphasize the
green vegetable materials the raw and
cooked greens and your broccoli and
chard and kale these are really nutrient
rich foods very low in caloric density
but you do have to eat a lot
and so that's that's one of the
downsides a lot more eating and chewing
the good news is though you have normal
microflora to feed your gut so you're
not getting tma which becomes tmao
which is so dominant in the meat
gut flora
you're getting
all of the micronutrients that you need
you get the fiber you have satiety
you're getting enough hydration because
you get a lot of water content from
these water content-rich foods in
addition to whatever water you're
drinking
but you do you and you don't have the
chronic constipation which means you
don't get the fissures and the
hemorrhoids and you're not having the
varicose veins and the prolapsed
uteruses and the ptosis and the
diverticulitis and all the other
conditions that come from a very low
fiber diet and this is one of the
challenges for people even they're
trying to eat healthy but using an
animal rich diet unless they get enough
fiber in they're not feeding the
microflora in their gut that's why
colitis patients have so much trouble
literally that microflora ends up having
to eat them
the coating of the intestinal tract you
know because it's it's going to survive
just like you want to survive you feed
it soluble fibers you get a different
balance
so
even if you're going to do a meat in the
diet you better get enough vegetables in
addition so that you know you get the
fiber and the nutrients and the
materials that you need talk to me
really fast about rice brown rice can i
have white rice i get no salt no oil um
but if i could just shovel my face full
of white rice um i would be a pretty
happy camper i love adding that to other
things like it's just such a cool base
um yeah
not a fan of white rice because you
eliminate the fiber the
the micronutrients that are so you know
so beneficial to rice all you're doing
is basically getting that carbohydrate
now granted it may not be as refined as
sugar and white flour and stuff there's
another problem with rice rice is one of
those bio accumulator foods because of
the ways it's grown so if you buy rice
that's been raised on land that they
raised cotton on they used arsenic
pesticides on those cotton fields and
there's still arsenic in those soils and
it sucks up into rice more so than it
might other people and so arsenic
concentrations in rice particularly
white rice grown
on fields that were sprayed with arsenic
pesticides can be a potential
bioaccumulation threat now there are
some places like california where they
never raised cotton didn't use as much
arsenic pesticides and so like we buy
lundberg farms organic rice and they are
very public about posting their arsenic
concentration there's some of all this
kind of stuff in virtually everything
actually the people that should be most
concerned are big chicken eaters because
chickens tend to be really high because
of the feed that they get and other
stuff but anyway um so if you're going
to use rice there's things you can do to
reduce the
concentration of our sick one is cook it
like you would pasta which is five water
five parts water one part rice
that'll reduce
the the buy rice that's you know
like i said grown by companies that are
growing on land that they don't use
arsenic pests and it's organically grown
so they're not spraying it with crop
today um there's other grains so like
quinoa and millet and other grains that
are also alkaline forming and you know
uh don't have that kind of bio
accumulation problem so i i'd say you
you'd use a variety of those but i would
prefer whole
grains not the refined grains
what about glyphosate
for somebody taking out so much
vegetable matter that's got to be on
your radar right it is an issue uh for
people fortunately now there's um a
higher and higher percentage of
organically grown fruits and vegetables
available in fact do you know who the
largest seller organic produce in the
country is now no it's costco foods whoa
okay costco foods is the largest
producer or seller of organic produce
you know who number two is no it's
walmart ah i should have guessed so
what's happened now is they've said oh i
don't think these companies sat down and
said well we really want to help the
health of our clients they said oh
people will pay a premium for food that
doesn't use glyphosate or doesn't use
chemicals well why don't we sell them
that food and now it's become a dominant
source of their produce sales because
people spoke with their dollars and they
said we would prefer to have our
vegetable material grown without this
and they're doing the same thing with
meat you know they're trying to buy
free-range meat that doesn't have all
the
antibiotics and the chemicals because
they know that animals biologically
accumulate and concentrate these
materials and i don't always think it's
an and or too even if you're going to
for example include animal foods in your
diet if you
eat a dominant amount of vegetable
materials in addition to that your
likelihood that your negative
consequences from the animal food will
be minimized and then the health
benefits of eating a healthy diet are
going to be maximized i think it's a
question of proportion in quantity
that's the major issue
i don't think that there's any evidence
that 100 vegan necessarily has any
advantage over the person that's mostly
vegan and uses a small amount of other
products in their diet i don't know that
we can demonstrate that difference not
from a health standpoint yeah that makes
sense
dr goldhamer dude you are a lot of fun
there is something about the twinkle in
your eye when you get going on this
stuff that i find just absolutely
amazing you've made me question things
that you know up until this point i had
never
stopped to really look at the way that
you present i think it's extraordinary
where can people engage with you if they
want to come to true north like what's
how do they do it well we have a service
for your viewers that if they would like
a free phone conversation with me about
whether their particular issues would be
benefited by anything like we're talking
about here diet and fasting they can go
to our website at truenorthhealth.com
and complete what are called the
registration forms which is just their
medical history basically i'll review
that they can call me at no cost and
i'll be happy to talk to them and if
there is something that's relevant i'll
be happy to refer them to who if they
want to do fasting to the closest place
to them that does fasting or two we have
a a dozen doctors that do phone coaching
and telemedicine that are available
remotely and we've got medical doctors
chiropractors psychologists all those
people that are available
and our website has
true north tv which is uh and there's
also a roku channel true north
on roku that has all of our video
content and educational materials
everything's freely available they can
go to the site they can look at our
studies our articles we even have a
fasting.org site that's just fascinating
site so it's our and other people's
research on fasting again all freely
available to people they just go online
and uh if they have any questions give
me a call
that's amazing
dude i hopefully you and i will cross
paths again um this has been really
really incredible and researching you
was beyond enlightening guys if you
haven't by the way um gone into his
world i highly highly encourage it this
is somebody who is a lifelong devotee of
meat
and he's really got me thinking about
things that i'm going to be
experimenting with and trying you know
look you know my thing i want to live as
long as humanly possible and in good
health uh and this is the man that has
it he's putting it to the test
check out our book the pleasure trap
it'll bend your mind no for sure um
the concepts in that book are
extraordinary
definitely that's in fact we should
bring you back for round two to talk
about the psychological problems that
people go through when they try to do
this and that's a whole interview unto
itself
all right guys and speaking of things
that are unto themselves if you haven't
already be sure to subscribe and until
next time my friends be legendary take
care
thank you guys so much for watching and
being a part of this community if you
haven't already be sure to subscribe
you're going to get weekly videos on
building a growth mindset cultivating
grit and unlocking your full potential
you